Karnoub and Weinberg: Ras oncogenes: split personalities
========================================================

* Title: Ras oncogenes: split personalities
* PMID: 18568040
* Link: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3915522/

Activated mutants and the GTPase cycle
--------------------------------------

In 1984, three groups reported that mutated Ras oncoproteins differ
functionally from their normal counterparts [41]_ [42]_ [43]_. The oncogenic
forms of Ras exhibited impaired GTPase activity, which suggested that the
hydrolysis of GTP somehow terminates the activated state of the protein, which
is consistent with the presumed analogy to the behaviour of G proteins::

STL::

    Ras has GTPase activity (catalyzes GTP->GDP).
    Loss of Ras GTPase activity correlates with oncogenic activity.

BEL::

    # Note the leap to causal statement, for simplicity
    # Note also the transition from loss-of-function observation to positive
    # statement about causality

Furthermore, the link between the much-studied Gly-to-Val substitution of
residue 12 of H-Ras and GTP hydrolysis was made the following year by Frank
McCormick’s group, which noted that antibodies that are specific to that region
blocked GTP binding [44]_.

STL::

    Antibodies to Ras G12 region and GTP compete for the same site.

Mechanism::

    Ras binds GTP at G12 region.

Other oncogenic mutations (such as Gln61leu in H-Ras) were also shown to impair
GTP hydrolysis [45]_::

STL::

    Ras Q61L is tumorigenic.
    Ras Q61L has diminished GTP->GDP conversion activity.

and other oncogenic forms of Ras were later determined to
be impaired in GTP hydrolysis (for example, REF. [46]_).

STL::

    # Get identities of other mutants from reference 46.

However, the extent of such impairment did not always correlate with
transformation, suggesting that compromised intrinsic GTP hydrolysis was
necessary but not sufficient for aberrant Ras activation.

STL::

    # How to indicate necessity vs. sufficiency?

An initial study in this area, published in 1982, showed that the mature form
of viral H-Ras localized to the cell membrane47. Several months later it was
demonstrated that viral H-Ras is palmitoylated at the C terminus; the resulting
attached lipid moiety facilitated its association with the membrane48. The
functional connection between this lipid modification and Ras function was made
by Douglas Lowy’s group in 1984, which showed that lipid binding and membrane
association were actually required for the transforming activity of the viral
H-Ras oncoprotein49,50.

working with cellular H-Ras, Stuart Aaronson’s group proceeded to demonstrate that this C-terminal processing and membrane recruitment of Ras is a prerequisite to its biochemical activation51.

The molecular mechanisms of Ras lipid processing were laid out over the subsequent 5 years through a series of observations using yeast genetics, protein biochemistry and in vitro cellular systems52–57 (FIGS 2,3).3).

Indeed, the C-terminal CAAX motif, previously found to be important for Ras
function, was found to be the target of a post-translational modification that
involved the addition of a farnesyl isoprenoid lipid, catalysed by the enzyme
farnesyl transferase (FTase).

Subsequent studies determined that this prenylation reaction is followed by the
proteolytic cleavage of the AAX sequence, catalysed by Ras-converting enzyme-1
(RCE1) and the carboxymethylation of the now terminal Cys residue by the
isoprenylcysteine carboxymethyltransferase-1 (ICMT1) enzyme.

Although these CAAX-signal modifications appeared to be essential for the
association of Ras with the plasma membrane, other studies identified the
requirement for a second C-terminal signal that facilitates full membrane
recruitment and hence full Ras function (for example, see REF. 57). For
K-Ras-4B, this second signal is a string of positively-charged lys residues
upstream of the C terminus that are sufficient to anchor the protein to the
membrane. However, prenylated H-Ras, N-Ras and K-Ras-4A require a further
palmitoylation step in which a palmitoyl moiety is attached to upstream
C-terminal Cys residues before their anchoring in the membrane is stabilized.

References
----------

.. [41] McGrath JP, Capon DJ, Goeddel DV, Levinson AD. Comparative biochemical properties of normal and activated human ras p21 protein. Nature. 1984;310:644–649. :pmid:`6147754`.

.. [42] Gibbs JB, Sigal IS, Poe M, Scolnick EM. Intrinsic GTPase activity distinguishes normal and oncogenic ras p21 molecules. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1984;81:5704–5708. :pmid:`6148751`.

.. [43] Sweet RW, et al. The product of ras is a GTPase and the T24 oncogenic mutant is deficient in this activity. Nature. 1984;311:273–275. :pmid:`6148703`.


